I want to do working for my kids,
giving them a better life. It's a scam
that's targeting some of the world's
most vulnerable people.
>> Everything was based on on lies
>> who are trying to come to work in the UK
care sector, looking after our sick and
our elderly.
>> I was ready to go there and work hard.
Imagine losing 15,000 in Africa. People
had to sell their houses.
>> This young man, his future has been
tattered.
>> Scammers are exploiting a flawed
immigration system and the victims have
been abandoned by the authorities.
>> I think she's a scam up to now.
>> Many are taking matters into their own
hands.
>> Where's my money? Where is my money? or
turning to self-styled scammer hunters
for help.
>> No, I'm not going to ask. I'm just going
to walk just to check. We heard your
story. We did our investigations. We
realized you took money. So, you took
£140,000. We are back.
>> Why would you pay £10,000 to a stranger?
>> People back home there, they are
suffering and someone is driving a Range
Rover with their money.
[Music]
My name is Mr. Brown. I'm from Zimbabwe.
I've been in UK since
half of my life actually since 2005.
That's my nickname since I was back in
Zimbabwe.
>> I thought, you know what? Let me not use
my real name because obvious there are
so many people who do not like what I'm
doing.
I like traveling uh seeing places.
>> So I just thought one day ah why can't I
just you know have my own YouTube
channel where I post my stuff when I
travel show people whatever I see when I
go out there.
>> Mr. B is off to Birmingham. This is
Humber Bridge guys. Ha bridge. I love
you, sweetie.
>> Oh, nice.
>> I was reading an uh article on Facebook
and I saw a woman who posted as
anonymous who was in South Africa that
she got scammed of
£6,500.
I commented below that can you please
get in touch? So she gave me the details
of the guy who scammed and the guy was
like 4 and a half hours away from where
I live.
That's when I decided to go to confront
the guy.
>> Either I get the money today or I'm
calling police.
>> He agreed to pay some of the money that
same day. And from then I put posted
that link on my YouTube channel and my
Facebook. people like oh my god just do
it for everyone to be honest from then I
never stopped and I did not know that
the network is huge I just thought it's
a small thing until I got involved
that's when I realized
I'm a political reporter and I focus on
migration and trade usually
for over a year I've been investigating
cases of scammers who have prayed on
vulnerable people trying to come to the
UK as migrant care workers. The origins
of this all started in COVID uh during
the pandemic.
>> Intensive care is under pressure like
never before.
>> The government was today attacked for
neglecting care homes where COVID 19
infections have run rampant. Almost 7%
of care rolls were unfilled in the last
year, which left 105,000 vacancies being
advertised per day. The government
realized that it needed to do something
to allow more people to come into the
country to fill those vacancies that
existed. Sources close to government
have told me that there was huge
pressure on them to bring in this system
very very quickly to fill those
vacancies. It was a rushed process.
The system that the government devised
was to allow care businesses in the UK
who really needed staff to recruit those
staff from overseas and offer them
something called a certificate of
sponsorship.
It soon became clear that the system
wasn't working as intended to. People
were paying 5, 10, sometimes even 20,000
to get the certificate of sponsorship
that proved that they had a job in the
UK. And then after paying that money,
the employer just disappeared.
>> Right. So this is my Facebook page,
Samers and Fraudsters
on here. That's where I do my uh
Facebook live addressing people,
telling them about
this scam. Why would you pay £10,000 to
a stranger? You don't know this person.
You've never met this person. You just
pay. You don't go in the car park, give
someone cash, you don't take a picture,
don't record anything. They go. This
thing has to stop. If a victim gets in
touch, I'll ask them for the details of
the scammer. So, I'll just ask the
victim to provide proof. If I have
proof, I'll just have to post.
I do post photos as well. When they see
their pictures, straight away they're on
the phone calling you. An hour later,
they've refunded the money.
>> If you are worried about your picture on
my thing, come to my inbox. Then we
talk.
>> If it doesn't work, that's where
sometimes if I can find address, I will
visit them.
>> Sorry guys, I couldn't go on live for 3
days as I was trying to recover some
people's monies. Like now I'm coming
from I went to stock today.
>> We heard your story. We did our
investigations. So you took 140,000
>> yesterday again. I was on the road. I
went to Bansley.
I'm always on the road because when you
go on the road and you see people happy
they've recovered their money.
>> Hey my sister, how are you? The total
amount, how much did you did did you pay
her?
>> £58,000.
>> I'm not stopping. I know people like,
"Ah, why is he doing it?" Ah, yes.
People appreciate when you do a good
thing for them. All you need to do is
put few by lunch. You know, I like my
food. That's it.
>> Never again.
>> When I started doing this, I got good
results. So maybe that's what still
motivating and people referring people.
People saying you lost money, go to this
guy. So that will just give me a bit of
energy as well to say, you know what?
Okay, let me just help you. People knew
that people in Africa and other
countries they are desperate to come
here. Then people took that advantage
now of if I take money from someone in
Africa how is they going to report here.
So people started now charging6,0007,000
and it went on to £15,000 per candidate
and imagine losing 15,000 in Africa.
>> This is an example of a certificate of
sponsorship. This is the document that a
migrant worker needs to be given by an
employer in the UK and it has a code on
it and they need that code to be able to
apply for a visa from the home office.
People are selling these documents for
tens of thousands of pounds, you know,
up to about $20,000.
Prospective employees shouldn't be the
ones paying for this, but people are
desperate to be able to get into the UK.
But more often than not, the document
that arrives is fake or they never get
anything at all.
How did you first hear about Tendai?
>> The first person to contact me was a
lady who was in Zimbabwe. She paid uh
Tendai about £6,000. It's a lot of
money. So
when I was busy helping her, two more
people came. They were reporting the
same person. So I ended up forming a
group to check how many people there are
until I realized she has scammed a lot
of people involving even some of her
relatives. In total
so far it's about over £50,000.
>> I think you all know me. My name is Mr.
Brown. So memory I want you to to tell
us exactly what happened on your case.
I've paid and I $3,500
US. So I decided to report the matter to
you Brown so you may help me to recover
my money.
>> She was lying and lying and lying and
lying and I've tried by all means to
communicate with her. She's not
cooperating. So leave it with me.
I'm a teacher. I'm a high school teacher
by profession.
I feel sometimes it's a god-given job. I
think teaching is a it's a calling.
Life in here in Harare is uh quite
challenging.
That's why I do the hustling. Sometimes
I sell fruits. Uh sometimes I sell meat,
sometimes I sell uh clothes. I was
hoping for a change.
I was talking to a long time friend.
That's when she said, "I've got a niece
who is doing this CO."
So I said that's good news.
>> Memory thought that she was able to get
a COS from a woman called Tendai in the
UK.
She said, "Ah, no problem."
But during the process,
you can as well as find other people.
I had a whole lot of relatives who are
looking for that opportunity to go to UK
through sponsorship.
The cos were going for five to to to
6,000.
>> Memory is what's known as an agent. She
originally wanted to get COS for her own
family and then thought that she could
offer some help to other people.
>> An agent is someone who connects the
victim and the owner of the company.
It's not like agent is a scammer. No,
that's where thing people have to know.
The first person that I have approached
was my sister.
I spoke to my to my cousin sister.
I spoke to a friend of mine and the
sell clothes straight from from China.
The goal, the point, the reason I wake
up every day uh hustling is to retire my
father. Like the man works a lot. So I
just wish to to to retire him and set
him up with something nice.
My father had a car and he actually sold
his car to pay the person who said she
was selling the the cos and after that
she was just delaying delaying delaying
the whole process until she she came up
with the story just went in a drain just
like that.
>> Most of these scams will follow the same
pattern. the scammer will pressure the
migrant worker to pay that money very
quickly and then it'll be delay delay
delay blaming the home office blaming
anyone else and it slowly dawns on the
migrant workers that that cos isn't
coming when I've just sent the money for
for
uh she said they were supposed to start
work on the 1st of June something of
that sort I called her she said, "I'm in
the hospital." That's when I started to
to question her. So that's when I
started to realize that it was a scam.
My father, I barely see him like these
days. He's off to work in the morning
and I may even come back late. I need
time with my father, too.
[Music]
I'm very closed.
You have to start it all again
so that you can live a better life.
That's all I just want. I thought I was
playing my part as the father was.
>> Everybody else was expecting
a change.
[Music]
>> It's very stressful.
>> Yeah, it's very emotional.
[Music]
It's not just the COS that people are
having to pay for. There's a lot of
other costs associated with coming to
the UK. People are having to pay to do
language tests. They're having to pay to
get driver's licenses. It adds up to be
a huge sum.
>> Is a friend of our cousins. with the way
she was talking and showing us other
people's services that she gave to other
people. We just said, "Wow, this is
going to work for us." But
nothing came up. I don't know
what's going to happen if I met him
right now
>> because I want my money.
[Music]
When I realized that there's nothing
from tendai, I started to give tendai
pressure to refund the money. I thought
would just refund me with the money I
give them. Then we ended from there.
[Music]
What makes me believe that? Because
you've been lying.
This is not right at all. You don't even
care on what is transpiring between me
and
you. Just me.
I cut.
That's what she normally does.
>> How does that feel when she doesn't
answer your phone call?
I feel extremely hot like I'm being
cooked.
She's not remorseful.
She's not apologetic.
I I feel so so used. Everything was
based on on lies.
This is never existed at all.
Right now I have Mama Tada and Tada's
auntie on the call. Can you please
explain yourself?
Tadwa and his family were only ever in
contact with memory. They gave all of
their money to memory. So when it became
clear that their COS wasn't turning up,
they only had one person to blame.
>> When you lost money, you've got someone
to point a finger at. So they are just
trying to see if they can recover it
through memory. But memory she's a
victim.
>> Up to now we don't know what's going on
and she was not being transparent to us.
So it happens that today the case was in
the police station.
It was quite scary.
I've never been in a police station. It
was it it was my my first time. And when
I went there, I was thinking that I was
I wasn't going to come back. I was
imagining myself into the sales with my
child.
It's often difficult to prove where the
money went. It's often handed over in
cash rather than through bank transfers.
That means there's no paper trail.
>> The police, they said just go home and
discuss and if you are not satisfied,
you'll come back here.
Whatever happened between me and Tendai,
they don't care.
I wanted to get arrested. That made
bring back the money.
>> I didn't spend their money. I took the
money to tendai.
>> My head is still puzzling. Is puzzled.
I'm also a victim to to tendai.
Up to now, I think she's a scam up to
now.
>> Scams like this are not only losing
people money,
>> but they're tearing communities apart.
>> Imagine convincing a person only to
realize that you are being scammed.
I can I could see that this young man
his future has been tattered
and I felt tad as my as my son. It
wasn't easy for me and I said but why
why could I ruin such a such a young
man's future like this? What is he going
to do at the end?
The really devastating thing about these
scams is not just the impact it has on
people's financial situation, but it's
the impact it has on their mental
health, on their sense of self, and it
robs them of an entire future that
they'd imagined.
The reason that so many people are
falling for these scams is because the
UK system has a stamp of home office
approval on it and leaving Zimbabwe is a
really attractive prospect because the
economy is not doing well.
>> Everyone want to leave the country.
Everyone want to come here. They are
told you get money like if we get money
you know in trees like that.
So
>> okay, this is uh the cottage that I
managed to build. But this was after
after Tendai had taken some money from
me. So I sold the bricks. Now
Sheila is yet another of Tendai's
victims and her case is possibly one of
the most egregious. She's in a bad
financial situation and she's also
actually one of Tendai's family.
>> So the wardrobe, the table, I saw them.
Then this is the dining.
I had a fridge which was a capri fridge
which was here. I sold it also.
[Music]
My cousin brother
was married to was married to Tendai and
she said here in UK I can help you
because my aunt
is doing the s things. I was ready to go
there and work hard for the future of
these three.
So I was prepared to go and work. I was
thinking maybe if I go there, if I start
working then I will build a nice house
for my kids. Maybe I will give them
everything
that your mother can give to the kids.
A good shelter,
good education.
Yeah, better everything for them.
[Laughter]
[Music]
Tendai told Sheila that she'd be moving
to the UK imminently. She told her to
quit her job and move to her so she'd be
ready to travel. And then nothing.
>> We cannot do anything cuz she's far
away. We are here. So there's nothing
that we can do.
[Music]
>> The victims who are stuck in Zimbabwe,
they cannot report to the police here.
They can't report to anywhere. So the
only hope is maybe me or when that
scammer goes back to Zimbabwe.
>> If a scammer happens to come back to
Zimbabwe, that's when some victims are
able to take matters into their own
hands.
>> Head northwest, then turn left.
>> We are going to
confront Tapio from the information
we've received. He's around. He's in the
country. He's been hiding for a while
and he's blocked people that he owes
money.
There's a lot of us that he owes money
and
he's just been
Yeah. ducking and diving and not keeping
his promises.
>> In 400 m, sharp left.
>> My wife's been studying public health
for a while. she's got a diploma in
nursing. So, we paid about $7,660
um for the COS. Then they just kept on
stringing us on and on.
>> I think this is it. Right.
>> So, I saw a post on Facebook from a
group called COS scammers which is which
is a Mr. by Mr. Brown. We got to know
that Tapua is in Zimbabwe. He's
basically running away from the issues
in the UK.
And we managed to get his location or
where he was staying.
I stop you. I'm good. No more mad.
Okay,
>> you owe me, man.
>> Okay, now get me.
>> Okay, come in, guys.
>> You recognize me now, right?
>> I'm not denying anything.
>> No, no, come sit here. So, this can
escalate very fast.
>> I know. I know.
>> Okay, let's simplify. Let's not
complicate these things. Where is my
money? You owe me $5,660
as of right now.
>> But listen, Mr. Remember
>> I want let's not complicate things.
>> Let's not complicate things.
>> Right. How long has it been?
>> You can talk and talk. I don't know.
Maybe
>> you want me to get arrested. I don't.
>> Okay.
>> So, how long do I have according to what
you want?
>> You got 5 days.
>> Yeah. It's in your best interest to keep
your word cuz it's not child play
anymore. Okay.
Topa returned $1,500 of the 3,000 that
Goodmore gave him. And that was entirely
down to luck with Tepa being in the
country and persistence from Goodmore.
It's not something that every victim is
able to do.
>> The guy is in authority. What they need
to understand is these people don't have
a recourse.
You don't even know who to talk to in
the UK. You just end up with the Mr.
realms people that are now taking their
own initiative to help other people.
>> To be honest, I recovered uh a lot of
money. All in all, I've recovered over
£100,000.
I decided to visit Jai and she agreed to
meet me as well.
I just wanted to give hope to those
people back home.
So she gave me the location where we can
meet.
>> Hello.
>> Yeah. What's up?
You know, I think I think that's
location. Anyway, you will not miss me.
15 minutes.
She wouldn't want to miss this chance to
talk to me. So, she's coming.
Victims in the UK are told to go to
Action Fraud, which is a body of the
City of London Police. They can assess
whether they think a fraud has been
committed and then if they think they
need to pass it on to local police
forces for investigation.
[Music]
To be honest, for me, Action Fraud, I'll
put a zero. I never seen anyone, not
even one, came to me to say, "Oh,
they're now doing my story."
>> Last year, there were more than 300
cases reported to action fraud involving
certificate of sponsorship fraud. I
haven't found a single case that's
resulted in a conviction. So, scammers
like Tendai feel untouchable.
The money you're owing is a lot
honestly even in Zimbabwe.
[Music]
If it was one person or two people, I
would understand. Not more than nine, 10
people.
and and
truth.
Many of the victims that we've spoken
to, of course, blame the scammer, but
they also blame the British government
for leaving a system for so long that
was open to so much exploitation. And
they also blame the UK police for
failing to do anything to help them.
[Music]
The prime minister has said he wants to
take back control of our borders as he
announced plans to cut legal
immigration.
>> The introduction of the social care visa
led not only to a huge increase in
migration but also to a shameful and
deeply damaging increase in abuse and
exploitation.
We are therefore ending overseas
recruitment of care workers.
The Labor government has today announced
a massive shakeup to the immigration
system. Part of that is completely
stopping the recruitment from overseas
of migrant care workers. It's a massive
shakeup for the care sector because they
were previously hugely reliant on these
types of workers and it clearly means
that the home office has spotted these
flaws in the COS system because this is
now the end of COS's.
However, there's very little in here
that's actually going to bring any
justice to the people like memory and
because there's very little that's going
to change anything for the people who've
already fallen prey to these scams.
I feel as I think we all do just
extremely distressed that this has been
happening that the scale of abuse that
you've uncovered in relation to the
scamming uh and the industry that almost
seem to grow up around that is utterly
appalling and it's extremely
distressing.
>> When we came into government I was
shocked at the state of the system. It's
why we have banned those employers being
able to recruit from abroad and it's why
we are now taking action to close this
route.
>> Hello.
Okay. Hello. We Wow. We have met.
>> Okay. Did you got our money?
>> Ah, we didn't get money. She said she
used it all by herself.
>> Yeah. So, so, so, so what is the way
forward now? What is the way forward?
>> She said she used she used it on useless
things like betting and stuff. And I
said, "You cannot bet with over £30,000.
There's no way you can do that." She
said, "I did.
She was admitting that she took money. I
thought maybe she was going to deny it,
but she's even admitting.
I no longer have high hopes of getting
that money back.
Cuz at first I thought it was me only
but now knowing there are a lot of
people out there.
I don't know.
Maybe that's what she was thinking. I
will never go back to Africa. There's no
way they can see me or they will meet
with me. Maybe that's what she was
thinking.
By stopping this, what about those
people who have been scammed, who are
stuck in Africa? One, their hope of
coming here is finished. Two, they lost
money. So, I don't know how that the
government is going to help. But to be
honest, at the moment, it's in a mess.
Justice needs to be done.
Heat.
[Music]
[Laughter]